{:type :post
 :when "2014-05-01"
 :slug "protect-what-you-hold-dear"
 :title "On Japan, anime and cultural hegemony"
 :tags "software"
 :publish? true}

A small country, back to the sea, facing a geographical, political,
and more importanly, culturally dominant behemoth. When the Japanese
begin to build their own culture, when the become aware of themselves
as a people, it's hard to imagine them not being fiercely protective
in the face of such a massive and influential neighbor. When they
learn about an even bigger cultural hegemony, the West, they close the
borders, execute the Christians. They know exactly what they're up
against because they've been well acquainted with it for hundreds of
years, have witnessed the cultural diffusion and, after a while,
political dominance wielded by the originally Chinese Buddhist temples
answerable only to themselves. Despite the military dictatorship, the
Tokugawa ushered in a flowering of culture, in a way, with all that
peace and the protection. The development of a money-based
economy. Local industry. The stability of a slow moving
bureaucracy. The defanging of the nobility. But then the West, not
even remotely challenged by the distance and the sea and well versed
in how to use the seductions of a material culture, force their way in
and the Japanese are confronted with a choice: be colonized and thus
forced to change, or become a colonizer and control the change.

In a lot of anime, the hero, weak at first, confronts some large power
and is forced to grow stronger. He or she fails until he or she hits
on the notion that the purpose of the fight and the struggle isn't for
some sort of egocentric reputation, or even to defeat the enemy. It's
to protect the people they care about. That discovery is the path to
victory, or to some sort of victory (depending on the maturity of the
story's audience).

The bad guys, when they're not just a force of nature (say, an
invasion of mindless creatures), often have one of two
motivations. First, due to all the rampant corruption and compromise
around them, they want to destroy the world so they can remake it. If
not that, then they want to defeat whatever make up the
powers-that-be, convinced that they're corrupt because they've given
up on the values of the past. Quite often, the bad guys used to be
good guys, part of the world they now want to defeat, like samurai,
disenfranchised by the fall of the _bakufu_, encountering the
trivialities of Western materialism, or post-war citizens who see not
the transformation, but the emasculation of a proud, warrior culture.

And then there's a writer like Yukio Mishama, who not only beautifully
depicts the transformation of an heroic past into the dullness of the
quotidian present, he also recognizes (as evidenced by how he ended
his life) the limitations of art or, really, of any action to change
this dissipation of culture vitality. He becomes a kind of anime-style
enemy, a who wants to tear down in order to restore.

The anime heroes who succeed don't think on such grand levels. Instead,
they protect the people they care about. They put their faith in the
continuity of human life --- specific human lives --- while the bad
guys, regardless of the personal tragedies birthing their original
motivations, live and die by their abstractions. For them, culture is
subject to entropy, not transformation.

I've been reading Yukio Mishima lately. I really wish he'd come to see
the people in his life as carefully as he renders them in fiction. I
wish someone who embodied the virtues he loved but understood them
differently had been able to defeat him, and transform him, as do so
many anime heroes who turn early enemies into valuable friends.

As conventional as anime is, as insular and silly and
marketing-focussed as much of it us, this idea is driven home again
and again: protect the people who are dear to you, embrace those who
can help: this is the only way forward.

Maybe the key to protecting a hard-won culture, a hard-won uniqueness
of a people, is for the people to care for and protect those they hold
dear.

I know how reductive this all is, but it adds up to something both
important and obvious, that the choice between colonizer or colonized
is a false dichotomy. Protect what you love when you have the strength
to do so. Respect the right of others to do the same. _That_ is how
you earn respect, and respect is how you keep what's best in you.

Nostalgia? Big ideas? Big abstractions? Those will get you killed.
