{:type :post
 :when "2014-04-05"
 :slug "technology-review-presentations"
 :title "On technology review presentations"
 :tags "software"
 :publish? true}

When you're in a meeting and someone's proposing a technology for
general use, do everything you can to see what's good about that
technology. Pretend, for most of the meeting, that it is the neatest
thing you've ever seen, that by asking a few more questions, you'll
discover the next Silver Bullet. Do as much as possible to help the
presenter make the best case.

The purpose of the meeting is to break through your own "stable" modes
of thought, at least for the hour. Later, you can talk about
trade-offs versus other solutions, or cultural fit, or possible
longevity -- whatever the issue. There's always plenty of time to
reject things and it's natural for humans to want to keep the status
quo.

When you ask questions, ask how the new thing can help solve the
problems you're interested in. When you get an answer, try to amplify
the presenters take on the advantages of that particular solution.

Do _not_ ask why the proposed technology is any better than another
sort-of-similar technology. We all know about trade-offs. We don't
have to trump each other with our unimpeachably discriminating
natures.

Think in terms of a programming language (for example). All
programming languages allow you to write software. Some are more
expressive than others: but that's only a positive if you value that
kind of thing. Some have much better tooling support, but, again, that
only matters if that's what you value.

If you're not all that interested in tooling support, try to see it as
a great thing for the length of the meeting. Imagine you no longer
have a soft spot for, say, Emacs, that you love the idea of a giant
IDE with lots of built in tools. You might say something like, "Ah, I
see, so, given the IDE, I'd be in a much better position to track down
concurrency issues," even though you believe in your heart that a more
powerful language, with immutable data structures, would be better for
all concerned.

For a given set of problems, MongoDB is an excellent fit. For another
set of problems, Riak is stunning. Attempting to pit one against the
other in a winner-takes-all combat play is just too easy.

Putting the presenter on the defensive serves no one's purpose,
because all software-related technologies are trade-offs.

You can express that bias later on, or not. Chances are the presenter
already knows your preferences. You might have already argued about
these sorts of trade-offs before. Let it go for just a bit. _Act_, if
you have to. No one will construe your positive engagement as a change
of heart or endorsement. There's no money involved.

In the end, the presenters are going to feel a lot better about the
process if they feel like they've been understood, that their opinion
about the technology is respected. I don't mean to pretend you respect
the presenter's opinion. I mean to _actually_ respect it.

Giving that respect and helping the presenter put the technology in
the best light will make _you_ feel good, too, not only as a fellow
human discovering something new, but for the pleasure of stretching
your mind. For, if nothing else, experiencing an hour of compassion.
