{:type :post
 :when "2012-12-01"
 :slug "sick"
 :title "On the distortion of the senses while sick"
 :tags "life"
 :publish? true}

I was sick yesterday. Too sick to stay at work. Too sick to do
anything other than sleep or occasionally think about listening to a
podcast. I'll spare you the symptoms except to say they involved a
headache and the knowledge that eating something was probably not a
good idea.

What's interesting to me, other than the utter relief of _not_ being
sick now, is how being that kind of sick changes my senses.

I went to work, which was fine. I'd hoped that some coffee, and
something sweet to eat would fix me up. No go. Had a meeting. Typed an
email. After some quality time in the surprisingly cramped corporate
comfort station, I decided it was time to go home.

But the bathroom is where it started. Each station has a can of
something-or-other you can spray if you feel the need to be a little
kinder to those who come after you. Someone must have been kind,
because the vaguely floral scent was overpowering. It's as if, when my
cognitive functions are impaired, my senses fill in the gap.

Overpowering.

When I made my way on to the bus to head home, someone sat behind me
eating a Burger King sandwich. I could smell the wrapping paper. A
distinctive smell. Perhaps vegetable oil? The grease for whatever kind
of meat used in those sorts of sandwiches?

Thing is, I'm not all that sure she was eating something from Burger
King. I saw her sipping a soft drink before she boarded and heard her
shifting around a paper bag for what seemed thirty minutes and then I
caught the scent. Strongly. I might have imagined it, but I don't
normally imagine smells. I probably did imagine it. I'm almost sure of
it. Mild headache, nausea: and boom: I can create a world of scents.

Speaking of that thirty minutes: time distorts tremendously when I'm
sick. I must have listened to her shift around that paper bag for 30
seconds but it seemed to me that the bag was three miles long. She had
to crawl carefully through, pressing out the sides with dry hands to
widen the passage until she finally found what she was looking for. An
epic struggle, that paper bag.

Podcasts, though, are the opposite. While they take forever to run
their course, the hosts talk in a bizarre form of English in which a
sentence has twice as many syllables as it needs.

At home when I couldn't sleep, I could hear, through the general
white-noise of everyone's climate control systems, an occasional bird
cry, wings fluttering against a window, a child calling from one room
to another in the house across the way, dogs grunting as they chased
each other across a muddy yard, the porch smokers mumbling around
their cigarettes, the occasional horn on the Fremont Bridge.

The world was alive and I was sick, present in a way it never really
is when I'm well.
