{:type :post
 :when "2012-09-23 13:01"
 :slug "windmills-need-tilting"
 :title "On the need for tilting at windmills"
 :tags "software"
 :publish? true}

## scene

You're a software developer, an individual contributor at a company
who's business is the selling of software and related services.

You have an idea about something neat that you think meets a business
need. You write it up, explore it a bit, maybe write a prototype, then
show your manager. He likes it and shows the director. The director
likes it and shows the vice president. The vice president says no, and
that's the end of that.

![Quixote is our Hero](:site-url/pix/picasso-quixote.jpg)

The idea doesn't really meet a business need, isn't aligned with the
direction of the business, or, perhaps, he just doesn't get it or
doesn't buy the underlying premise and says no out of ignorance.

Regardless, he comes up with reasons for saying no and tells the
director, who adds a few more explanations of his own when he talks to
the manager, who expands on the context of the negative result to you,
the individual contributor.

A month later, you think up another idea. This one seems different
enough that the previous objections don't really apply. So you suggest
it to your manager, who suggests it to the director. This time, the
director says no. He knows how the Veep thinks and it just isn't worth
(and, he assumes, the Veep's) time to move the idea forward.

Another month another idea. Your manager asks you lots of tough
questions which add up to no.

Eventually, things work like this: You have an idea, you sketch it out
on paper. You think it meets a business need, or reduces costs, or
might be the start of a new revenue stream: but these sorts of
"business" concepts aren't your main thing, you realize, so you're
probably wrong about it anyway. You shrug, set the idea aside, let it
drop unspoken.

## the self as will and representation

What you've done is internalize a representation of the vice
president, the director and your manager, you've consulted these
chimeras, heard their likely answers (always no), and acted
accordingly.

You've internalized a power structure such that you no longer have to
engage with it directly anymore. Instead, you just _know_ what will
happen and can thus avoid the pain of possible, perhaps likely,
rejection.

But the pain is still there. You have the idea, you run it through
the internalized script of the above scenario, you experience the
rejection all the same, even if more quickly and less personally than
before.

## internalized

It's not an especially complicated idea, that we tend to internalize
the authoritarian systems in which we find ourselves such that we
apply the dictates of that authority even when the "boss" is not
around.

I'm not talking about basic morality --- the capacity we all have to
see ourselves in others, and others in ourselves, and act accordingly
--- but about the sorts of power structures we find ourselves in as an
often unexamined part of our culture, both at work and at large.

Sure, we're all independent thinkers and masters of our own destiny
--- or so we've been told enough times to internalize --- but how many
of us, when on foot, wait at a street corner for the light to turn
green even though there are no cars coming? Walking across an empty
street, or not, is neither good or evil; it's not something that does
harm to oneself or another. Though it makes sense to adopt conventions
about how we cross roads, most of us don't cross against a red light
because we've internalized what's basically an arbitrary (if
reasonable) rule. Even though there's no one there to ticket us, there
_might_ be, and, well, it's just less complicated not to have to do a
risk assessment every time we step into the street.

## the metaphors

There are lots of wonderful metaphors for this notion of internalized
authority.

There's Bentham's Panopticon prison in which all the prisoners are
exposed to the guards' viewing station, but can't tell if the guards
are watching. All they can do is assume an omnipresence and act
accordingly. Imagine cameras, and you've got Britain's CCTV.

The idea is all over Orwell's _1984_ and is _de rigueur_ for any sort
of depiction of the modern totalitarian regime.

Michel Foucault turned the panopticon into a famous metaphor for
modernity revealing the nature of social behavior in the context of
often unrealized cultural power structures from the classroom on up.

I imagine Freud's _Civilization and its Discontents_ gropes toward the
same idea when he suggests psychological discontent is the tension
between what we might normally do versus what we give up in order to
retain the benefits of civilization. This internalized authority is
like the buzzing of a computer fan in the back room, or the whitenoise
of an air conditioner: you only notice it's irritating when it's
finally gone.

I wonder if Kafka's _The Trial_ is part of this pattern. Josef K
spends the whole novel trying to figure out what he did wrong --- he
never does --- until the guilt becomes so internalized that he not
only accepts his fate but believes in its rightness.


## the workplace as will and representation

Let's get back to you, the individual contributor with lots of ideas.

In your mind, the vice president has rejected a hundred of your
ideas. In actuality, he's rejected ten. Intentionally or not, he's
created a situation in which it's clear to you that the answer will
always be no, and, again, intentionally or not, he has communicated
(non-verbally) that he considers these ideas floating up from the
staff to be a bother and, well, he _does_ have that hire-and-fire
power, right?

As an "individual contributor" (aka, grunt), especially in the
software profession, you have a tenuous relationship with the Powers
That Be, otherwise known to you and your colleagues as "The Business".
You want to write neat-o software, but you internalize the notion that
neat-o is a waste of time if the software isn't right for "The
Business" or doesn't solve a "Business Need". You and your colleagues
encourage "agile" methodologies that don't say anything about how to
actually write high quality software but instead help you "align"
with "The Business" and manage time-and-effort expectations against
"business needs" as well as deliverable goals or "stories" about
"business value".

Snarky scare-quotes aside, I think this is largely all to the
good. Keep doing it. Seriously. Good software is good because it meets
a need. If you're writing it in a business context, then that's the
need you have to address.

But the scare-quotes aren't just snarky, they illustrate how the
internalized-authority exists within and is re-enforced by your
colleagues as well. As an individual contributor, you've no doubt had
these phrases quoted to you whenever you make a suggestion that varies
from the status quo. Your colleagues will say these sorts of things to
you before they even ask questions about your idea to see if they
understand what you're up to. They're re-enforcing the internalized
power structure, so to speak, when they're not just brushing you off,
having been down the idea road before you.

They've internalized what you have, that the Powers That Be really
aren't interested, don't want to be bothered, and have a much better
idea about what's going on with the business. All of which may be
true. Or not.

But here's the thing: as a mere grunt, or, uh, individual contributor,
how can you tell if any one of your ideas is contributing to a
business need, or not? You're hired to produce software and part of
producing software --- a creative pursuit regardless of the
engineering scaffold --- is to produce ideas. You're not hired to make
business decisions. Someone else is. By silencing your ideas, you're
preventing the opportunity for business leaders to make those
decisions.

## how to tilt

Don't assume that all the rejections and the quoting of "business
need" bromides at you in a kind of brush-off way mean that you're
clueless about the business needs, or customer needs, or don't come up
with good ideas. Don't, like Josef K, assume you're too ignorant to
have good ideas, and that the ideas you do have must be, by
definition, bad, that their rejection justified. Don't thrust the
knife into your own belly. That's that the veep is for.

The vice president is, ultimately, the one who makes the decisions, so
you should give him decisions to make. He should _have_ to make those
decisions and live with the consequences, good or bad. If he tells you
to never present another idea, then that's that, but let him _tell_
you that, don't do that on his behalf, or let the intermediaries and
mentors tell you that. Get it out in the open, if you can.

Your job is to get better at presenting your ideas in terms the vice
president is likely to understand. You don't want to fake him out or
hard-sell him (he's too smart for that anyway), but you want to make
sure that if he rejects the idea, it's because he fully understands it
but has decided it's not where he wants to place his bets. You want
your real idea to be decided, not a misunderstanding.

So, keep the ideas flowing for as long as you can and learn from how
well they fare with the Powers That Be.

If you can bypass the internalized culture of rejection shared by your
colleagues, your manager, his director, and so on, so much the
better. Send email. Schedule a meeting if the chain of command isn't
working for you. At best, you get that meeting and you'll get better
at presentation. At worse, you won't get the meeting because the real
veep declined it, not the imaginary veep you've internalized.

## the re-presentation itself

If constant rejection of your ideas is too emotionally taxing (and how
could it not be?), invest your sense of success in the presentation
itself. If you're sure that the stakeholder fully understands the
business implications of the idea (not the techno-babble
implementation details), then you've succeeded, whether he moves it
forward or not.

The successful presentation of an idea is when your audience
understands it, not when they accept it.

If you keep focused on that, you'll find the energy to try again and
again, because the attempt itself becomes the success.
